R is a statistical computer program made available through the Internet
under the General Public License (GPL). That is, it is supplied with a li-
cense that allows you to use it freely, distribute it, or even sell it, as long as
the receiver has the same rights and the source code is freely available. It
exists for Microsoft Windows XP or later, for a variety of Unix and Linux
platforms, and for Apple Macintosh OS X.

R provides an environment in which you can perform statistical analysis
and produce graphics. It is actually a complete programming language,
although that is only marginally described in this book. Here we content
ourselves with learning the elementary concepts and seeing a number of
cookbook examples.

R is designed in such a way that it is always possible to do further
computations on the results of a statistical procedure. Furthermore, the
design for graphical presentation of data allows both no-nonsense meth-
ods, for example plot(x,y), and the possibility of fine-grained control
of the output’s appearance. The fact that R is based on a formal computer
language gives it tremendous flexibility. Other systems present simpler
interfaces in terms of menus and forms, but often the apparent user-
friendliness turns into a hindrance in the longer run. Although elementary
statistics is often presented as a collection of fixed procedures, analysis
of moderately complex data requires ad hoc statistical model building,
which makes the added flexibility of R highly desirable.

R owes its name to typical Internet humour. You may be familiar with
the programming language C (whose name is a story in itself). Inspired
by this, Becker and Chambers chose in the early 1980s to call their newly
developed statistical programming language S. This language was further
developed into the commercial product S-PLUS, which by the end of the
decade was in widespread use among statisticians of all kinds. Ross Ihaka
and Robert Gentleman from the University of Auckland, New Zealand,
chose to write a reduced version of S for teaching purposes, and what was
more natural than choosing the immediately preceding letter? Ross’ and
Robert’s initials may also have played a role.

In 1995, Martin Maechler persuaded Ross and Robert to release the source
code for R under the GPL. This coincided with the upsurge in Open Source
software spurred by the Linux system. R soon turned out to fill a gap for
people like me who intended to use Linux for statistical computing but
had no statistical package available at the time. A mailing list was set up
for the communication of bug reports and discussions of the development
of R.

In August 1997, I was invited to join an extended international core team
whose members collaborate via the Internet and that has controlled the
development of R since then. The core team was subsequently expanded
several times and currently includes 19 members. On February 29, 2000,
version 1.0.0 was released. As of this writing, the current version is 2.6.2.

This book was originally based upon a set of notes developed for the
course in Basic Statistics for Health Researchers at the Faculty of Health
Sciences of the University of Copenhagen. The course had a primary tar-
get of students for the Ph.D. degree in medicine. However, the material
has been substantially revised, and I hope that it will be useful for a larger
audience, although some biostatistical bias remains, particularly in the
choice of examples.

In later years, the course in Statistical Practice in Epidemiology, which has
been held yearly in Tartu, Estonia, has been a major source of inspiration
and experience in introducing young statisticians and epidemiologists to
R.

This book is not a manual for R. The idea is to introduce a number of basic
concepts and techniques that should allow the reader to get started with
practical statistics.

In terms of the practical methods, the book covers a reasonable curriculum
for first-year students of theoretical statistics as well as for engineering
students. These groups will eventually need to go further and study
more complex models as well as general techniques involving actual
programming in the R language

For fields where elementary statistics is taught mainly as a tool, the book
goes somewhat further than what is commonly taught at the under-
graduate level. Multiple regression methods or analysis of multifactorial
experiments are rarely taught at that level but may quickly become essen-
tial for practical research. I have collected the simpler methods near the
beginning to make the book readable also at the elementary level. How-
ever, in order to keep technical material together, Chapters 1 and 2 do
include material that some readers will want to skip.

The book is thus intended to be useful for several groups, but I will not
pretend that it can stand alone for any of them. I have included brief
theoretical sections in connection with the various methods, but more
than as teaching material, these should serve as reminders or perhaps as
appetizers for readers who are new to the world of statistics.

Notes on the 2nd edition

The original first chapter was expanded and broken into two chapters,
and a chapter on more advanced data handling tasks was inserted after
the coverage of simpler statistical methods. There are also two new chap-
ters on statistical methodology, covering Poisson regression and nonlinear
curve fitting, and a few items have been added to the section on de-
scriptive statistics. The original methodological chapters have been quite
minimally revised, mainly to ensure that the text matches the actual out-
put of the current version of R. The exercises have been revised, and
solution sketches now appear in Appendix D.


