12

2

Cognitive Intelligence

Fig. 2.1 Triarchic theory of intelligence

Analytical

Intelligence

Creative

Practical

Have you noticed the difference between Radha and Uma?

You’ll notice that different project managers have different abilities to execute projects. This difference is evident in the way they handled the situation. This is 
because they differ in their ability to understand project complexity, adapt to their environment, learn from experience, and overcome obstacles. It has been said that 
successful project managers require both cognitive and emotional intelligence. This chapter will focus on cognitive intelligence.

2.1 What Is Cognitive Intelligence

Intelligence is a key construct employed to know how individuals differ from one another. It provides an understanding of how people adapt their behaviour according to 
the environment they live in. Psychologists have proposed many deﬁnitions and theories for intelligence. A psychometric approach views intelligence as a collection of 
abilities and expresses it as a single measure of cognitive ability. Information processing approaches describe the processes people use for intellectual thinking and 
problem-solving. This approach focuses on studying the cognitive functions that underlie intellectual behaviour.

Sternberg (1985) deﬁnes intelligence as the ability to adapt, to shape, and select environment to accomplish one’s goals and those of one’s society and culture. 
Sternberg (1988) developed theory of intelligence, which he titled the triarchic theory of intelligence because it sees intelligence as comprised of three parts: 
analytical, creative, and practical intelligence as shown in Fig. 2.1.

2.2 Analytical Intelligence

Analytical intelligence is closely related to academic problem-solving and computation. Sternberg says analytical intelligence is demonstrated by the ability to analyse, 
evaluate, judge, compare and contrast, and problem-solving. 2.5 Key Cognitive Skills

13

2.3 Creative Intelligence

Creative intelligence is characterized by devising or imagining solutions to problems and situations. Creativity in this area includes ﬁnding novel solutions to 
unexpected problems, creating beautiful works of art, and well-written short stories. I was camping in the woods with my friends and realized I forgot my camping coffee 
pot. The person in your group who ﬁnds a way to brew coffee well for everyone is rated as having a higher creative intelligence.

2.4 Practical Intelligence

As Sternberg (1988) suggests, practical intelligence is sometimes compared to ‘street smarts’. As a practical tool, apply your own experiential knowledge to ﬁnd 
solutions that work in your daily life. This type of intelligence seems to differ from our traditional understanding of IQ. Individuals who score high on practical 
intelligence may or may not have comparable scores on creative and analytical intelligence.

2.5 Key Cognitive Skills

To be a successful project manager, you need to have all three components of intelligence and related skills. We will discuss four cognitive skills that are required for 
the successful execution of projects.

2.5.1 Analytical Skills

Analytical skills are the abilities that enable us to observe, investigate, and interpret speciﬁc situations in order to develop complex ideas and solutions. Analytical 
thinking can be used in almost any situation. B. Project management, customer needs, etc. A key component of analytical thinking is the ability to quickly identify causal 
relationships. It means understanding what happens in the process of problem-solving and how new ideas relate to the situation.

Developing this skill will help you achieve organizational and project goals and support your personal career goals. Use analytical skills in your daily work to make 
decisions based on meaningful analysis of data and demonstrate reliable and pragmatic thinking.

Analytical skills for project success are often deﬁned as the ability to decompose a problem into parts and see connections and dependencies. A project manager with 
analytical skills can effectively plan and lead projects to success. You can accurately predict outcomes and plan to reach your goals. Analytical skills can also be used 
in talent management. Determining expectations and setting them with project team members requires good planning and analysis. Planning for 14

2

Cognitive Intelligence

project meetings and reviews also requires analytical and detailed skills. It is suggested that project managers should use all their analytical skills when interacting 
with people.

Analytical thinking skills are critical in the workplace. It is essential for gathering data, solving complex problems, making rational decisions, as well as summarizing 
data and executing well-thought-out projects.

If you think your analytical thinking skills need some brushing up or you just want to improve it, here are some strategies you can do:

• Be observant

• Read books

• Learn how things work

• Ask questions

• Play brain games

• Practice your problem-solving skills

• Think about your decisions.

At the end of the day, like any skill development, you have to a lot of practice and application. Learn from your everyday experiences. Then, practice your analytical 
skills until it comes naturally.

2.5.2 Critical Thinking

Critical thinking (CT) means being able to build and understand a reasoned argument to apply scepticism to what you hear and specially to recognize an incorrect or 
fraudulent assertion. CT involves conﬁrming the facts as you understand them, eliciting knowledgeable debate regarding the evidence, verifying the source of authority 
for what you hear, generating alternate explanations, and testing what you believe. CT requires that you educate yourself about the facts and not accept what is supplied 
by others.

As a critical thinker you must actively engage in.

• Testing the facts by poking holes in all arguments

• Careful consideration of trustworthiness of the sources of new information

• Scrutiny of potential alternative explanations of the evidences presented.

As a critical thinker, you should be aware of your own attitude and beliefs and see that your objectivity is not getting effected by your attitudes and beliefs. You 
should be open to new points of views with intellectual caution.

CT requires that you discard your previous opinion and believe in a state of affairs shown to be true regardless of whether the new information support your deeply held 
belief. Each of us have belief system that contains large array of beliefs. Your beliefs are changing as you receive new information. Critical thinker 2.6 How to Enhance 
Critical Thinking

15

actively seeks to examine their own belief structures and test these assumptions to assure accuracy.

Intensity or strength of attitudes determines your willingness or openness to alter your viewpoints. Your beliefs and attitudes that you possess come from direct 
experience and exposure. Your attitude towards an object can be inﬂuenced by how information is presented to you. The direct experience and exposure gives you frame of 
reference and establishes your worldview. Your thinking and judgement are mediated by attitudes you hold. Personal beliefs and attitude can and do inﬂuence your 
decisions. Critical thinker requires reﬂective scepticism, a cautionary approach that demands reasonable supportive evidences.

2.6 How to Enhance Critical Thinking

To improve your critical thinking, you need to recognize when careful decisional scrutiny is appropriate. CT can be enhanced by focusing on those skills that most 
directly apply to your thinking processes.

• Verbal reasoning skills that enable you to recognize and take stand against persuasive attacks improves your ability to think critically.

• Understanding and analysing the component of argumentation improves your critical thinking ability.

• Understanding of probability and uncertainty and focusing on the likelihood of anticipated events aids your critical thinking.

One of the ways to improve CT skills is focusing on the important aspects of a problem and determining what you are required to do with any information you uncover. 
Halpern (1998) provided examples of relevant tasks and questions that aid your CT.

2.6.1 Creative Thinking Skill

Creativity is the production of novel, valuable, relevant. and useful idea, and creativity may involve meaningfully recombining existing ways or doing something ﬁrst 
time by creating something entirely new (Amabile, 1988; Oldham & Cumming, 1996; Woodman et al., 1993). Research suggests that creativity results from an intersection of 
the personal resources available to the decision maker, the techniques and processes used and amount of drive or motivation in a speciﬁc problem-solving situation 
(Amabile, 1988). Table 2.1 shows these characteristics with examples. 16

2

Cognitive Intelligence

Table 2.1

Characteristics for creativity Characteristics Examples Personal resources Expertise, experience, knowledge, technical skills Techniques and skills Cognitive style, 
ability to take new perspectives, applying appropriate thinking skills, energetic approach to problem-solving Internal motivation Appropriate rewards (recognition and 
encouragement), clearly deﬁned goals, constructive feedback, challenges, interest, willingness, enthusiasm, freedom to explore passion for what you are doing

It is observed that creative people have one thing common is the love of what they are doing even though they come from varied background. Personal resources, thinking 
techniques, and motivation to perform are all necessary for creativity to occur. Higher the intersection of these three characteristics, higher will be the creativity 
(Amabile, 1988) (Fig. 2.2).

In most cases, creative individuals use process that, although it does not guarantee creative outcome, provides the ingredients for developing a creative solution. The 
ﬁve-stage creative model typically includes problem identiﬁcation, preparation, idea generation, idea validation, and veriﬁcation. For creativity to occur, all stages 
in the creative process should be present, and the quality of creative outcome is primarily determined by the quality of each individual component in the model (Amabile, 
1988).

Stage 1: Problem identiﬁcation: The initial step in creativity is recognizing that a problem exists. To solve a problem creatively, you must ﬁrst understand the real 
problem, which is the root cause. Keep asking why till you end

Resources

Technique

Resource

Technique

CREATIVITY

Motivation

Motivation

Minimum Overlap

Major Overlap

Fig. 2.2

Overlap between resource, technique, and motivation 2.7 How to Improve Creativity?

17

up with an understanding of the problem that needs no further questioning. If you have a productivity issue but identiﬁed the difﬁculty is the need to ﬁre a lazy 
employee, you have stated the problem in terms of a solution severely limiting the avenues you might imaginatively consider. Stage 2: Preparation: Preparation involves a 
search for information, clarifying all aspects of the problem, analysing the resources you can bring to bear, identifying informational deﬁciencies, and assessing your 
assumptions (Bazerman, 1990). If you process enough knowledge to cope with problems, then you activate that store of information, so it becomes available for use. If you 
discover that you are deﬁcient in key areas, you can spend time in the preparation stage learning what you need to know (Amabile, 1988). Stage 3: Idea generation: This 
is the stage that results in something new or novel. During this phase, you search your knowledge and experience to ﬁnd relevant information. Here, you go through what 
you know and apply various thinking methods to develop ideas and possibilities. Stage 4: Idea validation: In this stage, you evaluate and judge each idea generated during 
the third phase. Ideas are tested for appropriateness and evaluated for correctness relevant to your knowledge and experience base. True creativity has occurred when you 
validate that a novel and useful idea is a practical solution to the problem identiﬁed in stage 1. Stage 5: Veriﬁcation: If the response validated in the stage 4 
resolves the problem, the creative process is complete. However, if your idea fails to solve your dilemma but appears to be ‘getting warmer’ then you return to stage 1. 
Based on information gathered during stage 2, you redeﬁned the problem and continue through the creative process until you return to veriﬁcation. If you achieve 
complete failure, then your problem-solving attempts ends. However, if a reasonable response has been developed, the process repeats until you are either satisﬁed with 
the outcome or you are convinced that you are unable to generate a creative solution (Amabile, 1988).

2.7 How to Improve Creativity?

To improve the creativity, you need to look at each of the ﬁve processes and ﬁnd ways to improve each of these processes.

To improve problem identiﬁcation, it helps if you are able to learn as much as you can about the situation. It helps you to identify the true problem if you discover 
where the problem came from, if you distinguished facts from opinion and if you challenge all assumptions and information presented to you (Kepner & Tregoe, 1981). 
Another technique for improving problem identiﬁcation is turning the problem around by making the strange familiar and familiar strange (Gordon, 1961). 18

2

Cognitive Intelligence

By transferring the problem into something else you have the opportunity to recognize aspects of something you know quite well (the metaphor) rather than something that 
feels uncertain (the original problem). New insights can occur because attributes of the redeﬁned problem become evident and can be applied to original predicament: you 
are able to recognize the root problem.

Preparation for creativity can be improved if you allow yourself to pay attention, especially in uncommon ways, to useful concepts derived from things going on around 
you. Everyday event can add to your mental storehouse and increase the amount of knowledge available to draw from it at a later date (Plsek, 1997). Possible tools that 
have been found to aid preparation are suggested by Plsek (1997).

Enhanced idea generation occurs if you are ﬂexible to exploring possibilities, are internally motivated to achieve a creative outcome, give attention to particularly 
relevant aspect of the problem, and follow appropriate thinking processes as you move towards a solution (Amabile, 1988). Creative problem solvers are those who come up 
with a broad range of different alternatives rather than a small number of similar concepts. To the extent possible, you need to avoid evaluating ideas as they are 
developed, you need to encourage yourself to generate wild ideas, you should emphasize quantity over quality, and you should build on previous concepts.

Osborne (1953) provided Substitute, Combine, Adapt, Modify, Put, Eliminate, Reverse (SCAMPER) checklist to enhance idea generation. Most of us have difﬁculty coming up 
with creative ideas, primarily because we unconsciously impose mental obstacles that constraint the way we look at the problem and limit the number of alternatives we 
believe are relevant (Allen, 1974). Creative idea generation can be improved if you avoid:

• Always looking for right answer

• Always trying to be logical

• Strictly following the rules

• Insisting on being practical

• Being afraid of failure

• Resisting the desire to play

• Becoming too specialized

• Being too concerned with certainty

• Not wanting to appear foolish

• Saying ‘I am not creative’.

2.7.1 Problem-Solving Skills

In general, problem-solving refers to the ability to successfully deal with complex and unexpected situations and ﬁnd solutions. Problem-solving skills help determine 
why a problem occurred and how to ﬁx it. Problem-solving begins 2.7 How to Improve Creativity?

19

with identifying problems, developing solutions, implementing those solutions, and evaluating their effectiveness. Problem solvers are able to observe, assess, and act 
quickly when problems arise and are not afraid of the unknown. This is invaluable for identifying and resolving issues in a project environment. Problem-solving skills in 
a project environment have several important advantages. Problem solvers have been observed to possess the following qualities that they can bring to their roles and 
workplaces.

Time management skills are often underestimated as one of the beneﬁts of having problem-solving skills in the workplace. However, people with problem-solving skills 
usually also have good time management skills. The ability to manage time wisely and focus on what is important to the project/business leads to better decision-making 
and project/business impact.

Ability to prioritize, plan, and execute strategies: Problem solvers carefully assess customers and their needs and identify any problems in prioritizing, planning, and 
executing strategies to meet them. neither. All moving parts are in control as you can strategize how best to meet multiple unique needs.

Ability to think outside the box: Problem solvers often see opportunities in problems. Thinking outside the box is an important problem-solving skill in the workplace 
because it often leads to better results than originally anticipated.

Ability to work under pressure: This is often one of the most important beneﬁts of problem-solving skills in the workplace. Problem solvers are often good at handling 
pressure, such as shrinking deadlines or changing project parameters. Depending on your workplace culture, you may prefer someone who can provide quick solutions or who 
can take the time to identify next steps. Both are valid problem-solving qualities.

Risk management skills: Planning is an important problem-solving skill. Problem solvers can not only solve immediate problems but also predict future problems based on 
trends, patterns, experience, and current events.

Problem-Solving Skills There are six key problem-solving skills that you should have as project manager.

• Listening skills

• Analytical thinking skills

• Creative thinking skills

• Communication skills

• Decision-making skills

• Teamwork.

Morﬁn (2000) suggested new rules for effective problem-solving in projects. Problem-solving is an essential skill to handle the issues project managers encounter on a 
daily basis. Effective problem-solving actually circles around the people element in project management. How you relate and interact with people 20

2

Cognitive Intelligence

has a major impact on how effectively and how quickly you can solve problems (Jaeger, 2019).

2.8 Summary

In this chapter, we reviewed the concept of cognitive intelligence, with a tacit focus on project managers based on the triarchic theory of intelligence. Based on 
classiﬁcation by Sternberg (1988), we studied intelligence from three perspectives: analytical, creative, and practical. Four cognitive skills which have signiﬁcant 
ramiﬁcations on the performance of a project manager were identiﬁed as analytical skills: which helps a project manager to investigate a situation; critical thinking 
skill: which leads to an ability to draw reasoned arguments; creative thinking: the skill to provide novel solutions under constraints; and problem-solving skill: which 
leads to delivering out of the box solutions in unprecedented situations.

References

Amabile, T. M. (1988). A model of creativity and innovation in organization. Research in Organizational Behaviour, 10, 123–167.

Bazerman, M. H. (1990). Judgment in managerial decision making. Wiley.

Gordon, W. J. J. (1961). Synectics: The development of creative capacity. Collier.

Halpern, D. F. (1998). Teaching critical thinking for transfer across domains: Dispositions, skills,

structure training, and metacognitive monitoring. American Psychologist, 53, 449–455. Jaeger, S. (2019). 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/effective-problem-solving-project-managers-

stephanieon Kepner, C. H., & Tregoe, B. B. (1981). The new rational manager. Princeton Research Press. Morﬁn, E. (2000). New rules for effective problem solving in 
projects. Paper Presented at project

management institute annual seminars & symposium, Houston, TX. Newtown Square, PA:

Project Management Institute.

Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. (1996). Employee creativity: Personal and can’t actual factors at

work. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 607–634.

Osborn, A. (1953). Applied imagination: principles and procedures of creative problem solving.

Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Plsek, P. E. (1997). Creativity. ASQ Quality Press.

Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human intelligence. Cambridge University

Press.

Sternberg, R. J. (1988). A triarchic view of intelligence in cross-cultural perspective. In S. H.

Irvine & J. W. Berry (Eds.), Human abilities in cultural context (pp. 60–85). Cambridge

University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511574603.003 Woodman, R. W., And, S. J. E., & Grifﬁn, R. W. (1993). Towards a theory of organizational

creativity. Academy of Management Review, 18, 293–321. Emotional Intelligence

Learning Objectives

• Understanding self: Self-conﬁdence and emotional self-awareness; Johari window

• Managing Self: Transparency; adaptability; achievement drive; initiative; optimism

• Understanding others: Empathy and the role of communication; organizational awareness and service orientation (servant leadership)

• Managing others: Inspirational leadership • Developing others • Change catalyst

• Conﬂict management • Teamwork and collaboration (The chapter will only give a passing reference to this aspect, since it will b



