32

4

Making Decisions

Table 4.1

Types of decision based on contexts Context Cause–effect relationship Simple context Clear Complicated context Clear Complex context Not clear Chaotic context Not clear

Situation Known–knowns Known–unknown Unknown–unknown Unknowable

Decision type Simple Complicated Complex Chaotic

a new perspective on leadership and decision-making, which helps decision maker to sort issues into ﬁve contexts and proposed Cyneﬁn framework. This can be used to 
classify types of decision.

Simple decisions are the decisions taken in simple contexts. Simple contexts are characterized by stability and cause-and-effect relationships that are clear to everyone. 
This is in the realm of ‘known knowns’.

Complicated decisions are the decisions taken in complicated context. Complicated contexts may contain multiple right answers, and though there is a clear relationship 
between cause and effect, not everyone can see it. This is the realm of ‘known unknowns’.

Complex decisions are the decisions taken in a complex context. In a complex context, right answers cannot be searched out at all; rather, instructive patterns emerge if 
the leader/decision maker conducts experiments that can safely fail. This is the realm of ‘unknown unknowns’.

Chaotic decisions are the decisions taken in a chaotic context. In a chaotic context, searching for right answers is pointless. The relationships between cause and effect 
are impossible to determine because they shift constantly, and no manageable patterns exist. This is the realm of unknowable.

Table 4.1 shows the decision type based on context and cause effect relationship. Sometimes, it is not clear in which context we are in and what type of decision to be 
made. This is called a context of disorder. In this context, decision maker has to break the situation into its constituent parts and assign each to one of the other four 
contexts/realms and take decision based on that context.

4.1.1 Classiﬁcation of Decisions Based on Information and Judgement

Rangnekar (1996) observed that managers take decisions based on two aspects: one is information and other is judgement. Based on this, he has deﬁned four types of 
decision.

The ﬁrst kind of decision is called programmed decision. Programmed decisions are those decisions that can be taken purely on the basis of information- no judgement 
required. 4.1 Types of Decisions

33

The second kind of decision is the operational decisions. In this decision, information is collected, but in the ﬁnal decision-making, some judgement is used. For 
example, a procurement manager has to order material for the project. Project schedule/work package schedule is vital information input—(s)he has to consider what they 
are going to make in next few months. But (s)he has some other inputs which are not so deﬁnite, ex: What is the price rise expected, how likely is the scarcity of the 
material. (S)He might hear rumour about labour trouble at the site or at the factory that would impact the supply of the material. Nobody knows the answer and yet the 
decision maker has to make her/his decision. In these kinds of decisions, project managers have to use their judgement. This is where each project manager may use her/his 
judgement in different way, and we may get different decisions where information is essentially the same. I am sure you can recall many such situations that you have 
observed while managing project procurement.

Let me share an experience where inputs from two project management experts were sought to take decision about how to meet the changed ﬁre regulations with minimum 
structural changes in the building. The decisions were very different from both of them though the information shared with them was the same. Interestingly enough the 
project manager came up with a solution which was different and more practical to implement from these two experts in construction projects.

The third kind of decision is strategic decision. This is the decision where information is used, but judgement plays the key role. If we are thinking of a project to set 
up a new factory, the decisions required are:

1. What should be location of the new factory?

2. What capacity should the factory start with?

3. What products to make?

4. What technology to use.

These are four vital decisions. If these decisions are wrong, it would be difﬁcult to achieve the objectives for which factory is built. In strategic decisions, you will 
require information from multiple sources, and you need to make sure that sources of information are reliable. For such decisions, you will not have complete information 
and have to make decisions based on judgement.

The last category of decisions is entrepreneurial decision. Entrepreneurial decisions are vital decisions for long-term success of project organizations. These decisions 
cannot be taken on the basis of information alone. In fact, information plays a very small role in these types of decision. The decision maker taking these decisions uses 
her/his judgement to the full extent.

4.1.2 Classiﬁcation Based on Degree of Participation

One of the important aspects of decision-making is the acceptability of the decision. In project organizations, a decision has to be implemented by a number of people. It 
is very important that the decision is accepted to those who are going 34

4

Making Decisions

to implement it. Rangnekar (1996) categorized decision-making based on different degree of participation involved.

A-1 Type: In this type of decision, a person makes the decision all by herself/himself. One great advantage of this decision is that it does not take very much time. 
However, the acceptability of such decision will be very low, unless the person making the decision has a great charisma and people believe that her/ his judgement how is 
superior to their judgement. It is clearly autocratic decision.

A-2 Type: In this type of decision, the person making decision asks for information. (S)he collects information from those who are going to implement decision. Supplying 
the information creates some feeling that they are contributing to the decision. This is likely to get a little more support for the decision when it is being 
implemented.

C-1 Type: In this type of decision-making, the decision maker consults individually the various persons involved. (S)he listens to their ideas and advise and comes to 
her/his own decision. This has a greater merit in terms of acceptability because people feel they were consulted before the decision was made.

C-2 Type: In this type, the decision maker consults all the people concerned together and discusses various aspects of decision. This type of decision-making has the 
advantage that the decision maker is not just one person, but a group who feels that the decision comes out of their ideas. The person making C-2 type decision does not 
have to wait till the decisions fully evolved, as long as there is a feeling that (S)he has got the advantage of all the ideas and (s)he has now able to take decision 
based on various suggestions and comments. However, the ﬁnal decision is made by the decision maker.

G-2 Type: In this type, the decision maker and all the people concerned sit together to discuss and arrive at the decision based on consensus. This is a difﬁcult process 
unless all people involved share the goals and the values. If there is no consensus, then decision maker has to decide whether to continue with G-2 type or go for C-2 
type.

We have discussed four ways of classifying projects and depending on how you or your organization classify projects you will develop your decision-making style. Next, we 
discuss decision-making styles of project managers/leaders.

4.1.3 Decision-Making Styles

There are two major differences between decision-making styles: how information is used and how options are developed. Some people like to consider various data sets 
before making any decisions when it comes to the utilization of information. Such individuals are referred to as ‘maximizers’ in management literature. The outcome is a 
wise choice, but it can cost in terms of time and effectiveness. Other managers just want the key facts to take the decision are called: ‘Satisﬁcers’. As 4.1 Types of 
Decisions

35

Fig. 4.1

Four styles of decision-making. Adapted from Brousseau et al. (2006)

soon as they have enough knowledge to meet their needs, they are prepared to take action. When it comes to generating possibilities, ‘single-focus’ decision makers have a 
strong preference for selecting one course of action, but their ‘multifocused’ counterparts may consider several options and develop lists of them. People with several 
foci devote their efforts towards adjusting to circumstances, whereas those with a single focus on making things happen the way they think they should.

Using the two dimensions of information use and focus, Brousseau et al. (2006) created a matrix that identiﬁes four styles of decision-making: decisive (little 
information, one course of action); ﬂexible (little information, many options); hierarchic (lots of data, one course of action); and integrative (lots of data, many 
options). Figure 4.1 shows these four decisions- making styles.

Not all decision makers ﬁt neatly into little categories. A project manager must be able to use all four approaches because circumstances might also affect the best 
decision-making approach. For instance, in a business context, there might not be enough time or history to support in-depth assessments and consideration. While the 
multifocus technique may be necessary during times of relative uncertainty, stable environments tend to favour the single-focus form.

4.1.3.1 Decision-Making Styles Based on Ambiguity and People Focus Rowe and Mason take into account two spectrums to categorize decision-making styles (1987). The ﬁrst 
spectrum contrasts ambiguity and structure in an organization. This spectrum gauges people’s preference for either ambiguity or structure 36

4

Making Decisions

(i.e. clearly stated procedures and expectations) (i.e. open-ended and ﬂexible). The task (technical) versus people (social) spectrum is the second. This spectrum 
determines whether a decision is driven more by a desire to be correct, to achieve results (technical), or to foster harmony to have a positive social inﬂuence (social). 
The four types of decision-making styles are analytical, behavioural, conceptual, and directive. Each approach has a unique way of analysing situations to develop 
alternatives and evaluating alternatives.

(a) Analytic decision-making

Analytic decision makers consider a lot of information before deciding. Analytic leaders rely on evidence and data to make decisions. However, unlike policy makers, 
analytic decision makers will seek information and advice from others to conﬁrm or disprove their own knowledge. These decision makers are very tolerant of ambiguity and 
adapt easily, but they like to be in control of most aspects of the decision-making process. This approach to decisionmaking is well-rounded and can take some time, but 
it’s a good way to approach the task. Analytic decision-making can help you choose the best solution in situations where there are more than one options. When faced with 
a problem that has a clear cause and effect, use decision-making approach to ﬁgure out the best course of action. You’re using this approach to explore several options 
and acting based on the facts.

In this style, leaders need to analyse all the information available to them before deciding on a course of action. Having a team of industry experts to help make 
analytic decisions is beneﬁcial, but leaders need to be open to conﬂicting advice and ideas. At the same time, decision makers need to consider nonspecialist 
perspectives in order to make the most of analytical decision-making.

(b) Behavioural decision-making

Behavioural decision makers attempt to make sure all people work well together. Behavioural decision-making is group-orientated; however, in preference to brainstorming 
potential solutions, the group is given the alternatives available to them. From there, the group discusses the pros and cons of each preference. This style considers 
many different outlooks and critiques in the process.

The behavioural decision maker calls for proactive communication. A greater introspective method by discussing options that have been used in the past as opposed to 
trying to observe new patterns. Leaders need to open up multiple options for communication. Again, create corporations of those who can contribute their reviews and 
encourage democratic discussions. When using the behavioural decision-making style, don’t simply impose a path of action. Instead, examine what decision creates the 
maximum concord inside the agency. 4.1 Types of Decisions

37

(c) Conceptual decision-making

This style is more social and considers the perspectives of others. Conceptual decision makers value creativity and collaboration, and they look at a broad range of 
perspectives when making decisions. These decision makers are achievement-oriented and like to think about the future when making important decisions. This style is best 
suited for situations where there is a lot of uncertainty. In these scenarios, there is no easy answer, but over time, patterns emerge. Using a conceptual decision-making 
style can help you plan for the future and consider unknown variables. For conceptual decision-making to be effective, leaders must create an environment that encourages 
experimentation to uncover instructive patterns over time. In addition, leaders should pay attention to increasing interaction and communication. Group together people 
who can contribute innovative ideas and help with the development and delivery of complex project decisions. Patience is key, and leaders need to give themselves time for 
reﬂection.

(d) Directive decision-making

On the basis of what they already know, directive decision makers often weigh the advantages and disadvantages of a situation. Decision makers who make directive 
decisions are very rational but feel uncomfortable with high degree of ambiguity. Instead of seeking for further information from others, their conclusions are based on 
their own knowledge, experience, and reasoning. The beneﬁts of this technique are speedy decision-making, unambiguous ownership, and minimal additional communication. 
This decision-making method is effective in stable situations with known patterns and events. When making a judgement about how to act, save your decisions for situations 
where there is an unambiguous and evident cause-and-effect link. In other words, where everyone agrees on the correct response. A decision maker needs to be aware of the 
situation and determine if it calls for a direct decision. If so, they need to respond accordingly. You need to make sure you have in place speciﬁc best practices for 
recurring processes. As you sort through the situation, remember to ask yourself: Is this my decision? Do I have all the information I need to make this decision? When 
delegating work, be sure to communicate clearly and directly with your team. It is the leader’s job to understand when extensive interactive communication is not required 
and to make immediate decisions based on the information they already have.

4.1.4 Group Decision-Making in Projects

As a project manager you have to have group decision-making capability. One of the principle difﬁculties with making decisions in groups is deciding how to make the 
decision. Group decision-making is an effective management tool in the 38

4

Making Decisions

projects as people tend to resist what is forced upon them and support what they help to create (Kirytopoulos et al., 2010). There are four alternatives observed while 
making decisions in groups: get inputs from group and make the decision; delegate the decision to someone in the group; make decision through majority vote; make decision 
by consensus.

The Vroom-Yetton leadership model (Vroom & Yetton, 1973) suggests that the decision-making style should take into consideration: correctness of the decision, required 
level of commitment and the time available to make decision.

Table 4.2 shows four styles of group decision-making that are used in different decision environment along with their advantages and disadvantages.

When using the command style, the leader makes a decision for a group with very little input from the participants of that group. The members might also offer unique 
statistics on request, however are not requested to make contributions to ﬁnd a solution. In the consultative style, the decision maker seeks input and recommendation 
from the group. The leader then makes the ﬁnal decision by herself/himself. In consensus style, the leader seeks inputs and advice from a group and works via the 
decision-making process with the group, till each member of the group can ‘stay with’ the ﬁnal decision that is made. When using the majority vote, the decision is made 
by means of choosing the alternative which has more votes from the participants of the group.

Table 4.2

Styles of group decision-making

Name

Command

Consultative

Consensus

Majority voting

Description

The leader decides on her/his own

The leader decides on her/his own the leader seeks input and advice from the group

The group decides The leader acts as a guide to the group

The group decides The leader acts as a facilitator to the group

Advantages

The decision is made quickly

The decision is more likely to meet the need of the group then with the command style

High degree commitment to the decision by all members of the group members, as they are actively involved in the process

Disadvantages

The group members have little or no commitment to the decision

Some or all of the group members may still disagree with the decision that has been made

The time required to make a decision and the associated cost of people’s time

Simple and intuitive, Can lead to tyranny of brings quickly large the majority, a group number of people in on a may vote for other single decision with purposes then to 
resolve minimum cost a substantive issue 4.1 Types of Decisions

39

4.1.5 Biases in Decision-Making

Decision-making is important to being successful as a project manager. It is something we do (as project manager) everyday as we juggle schedules, resources, risks, and 
other critical success factors for the project. We have been taught for decades that decision-making need to be rational, looking at all viable information and logically 
arriving at the appropriate solution. But current research in psychology has shown us how the brain truly arrives at choices, and it is not as logical as we would like to 
think. The more we understand how our brains arrive at conclusions, the better our capability to make greater rational choices.

There are ﬁve areas, especially where ﬂaws in decision-making arise:

• Errors in logic.

• False assumptions.

• Unreliable memories.

• Mistaking the symptom for the problem.

• Biases.

In this section, we will discuss about cognitive biases. What are cognitive biases and how they be impacting your decision-making? Project managers need to deal with 
various kind of inﬂuences, including unconscious biases that could deceive them into making the incorrect decisions. As a project manager, decision-making is a big a 
part of your responsibilities. But how do you know that you’re making the right decisions with the data which you have? Everyone has biases, no matter how shrewd, well 
knowledgeable, or skilled they are. These biases will often lead individuals towards making the wrong choices because of their feelings, reminiscences, or preconceptions 
about the way things ought to be. Being aware about your cognitive biases is step one in the direction of defeating them. Here are eight of the common biases that 
individuals will stumble upon, similarly to the quality ways to defeat them.

4.1.5.1 Conﬁrmation Bias A conﬁrmation bias occurs when you look only at the positive evidence regarding a situation, while neglecting any negative evidence. In some 
situations, you may avoid looking into negative evidence altogether. Conﬁrmation biases occur throughout project management. Project managers may only seek positive 
information that tells them they are going to meet their deadlines, while ignoring negative news that could indicate that they are falling behind. Our minds prefer the 
status quo: We don’t want to have to make changes or alter our decision-making patterns, so we simply ‘write out’ contradictory information from our reality. This can 
lead to vastly different outcomes than we expect.

To defeat conﬁrmation bias, you must always be willing to question your own beliefs, and you must be open to change. If there’s something that you assume to be true, you 
need to be mindful, and seek out information to the contrary—no matter how certain you are of your beliefs. 40

4

Making Decisions

4.1.5.2 Information Bias Information bias stems from the belief that more information is always more valuable—and that every single avenue needs to be explored. One of 
the ﬁrst steps towards investigating any change should always be to determine the scope of that change. Exploring information outside of that scope is going to be a 
waste of resources, ultimately leading to a costly, bloated, and time-consuming process. In a world of data, information bias is becoming extraordinarily harmful.

4.1.5.3 Self-serving Bias We always perform well, and others always fail. This is a self-serving bias that shows us in the best light and everyone else in the worse 
(Boyes, 2013). It’s easy for a project manager to see that their team is working hard and trying their best. Consequently, it is easy to assume that it was the team’s 
work that led to a successful project, while it was someone else’s fault that led to a failure.

Self-serving bias is also often seen in interpersonal relationships. Project managers may always assume the worst of their team members (they didn’t do their work because 
they were lazy) while team members may assume the worst of their project managers (they moved the deadlines because they want to look good). In general, both work and 
personal relationships work best if every individual treats the other with the best possible interpretation of their actions. This can be achieved by creating a 
friendlier, more personal team culture.

4.1.5.4 Over Optimism It is easy to be overly optimistic when it comes to project management. Project managers will often report the best possible case when discussing 
results and strategies, and this can ultimately lead to a failure to perform up to the level that was promised. Project managers need to temper their enthusiasm and 
remember that there are a multitude of issues that could occur that could delay or otherwise adversely impact the project.

Over optimism does not stem from an attempt to mislead clients into thinking that production will be faster, or to placate upper management. Instead, over optimism is 
just a natural human mechanic, by which we assume that things are going to go well. Historically, they often have not which is why estimates should usually be rendered 
using historical data and updating them for the current time. If projects of a certain type are frequently delayed (such as by logistics, shipping, or third-party 
vendors), this needs to be factored in. Over optimism bias is the reason why estimates are almost always inaccurate?

4.1.5.5 Status-Quo Bias In this cognitive bias, it is simply assumed that whatever you are already doing is the best way to do things. Subconsciously, you may react 
negatively to any suggestion of change, simply because change brings risk with it. Most people prefer things to stay the same. It makes sense; change can lead to 
unexpected problems down the line. However, in the modern world, businesses have to change and so do project managers. New strategies and tools are constantly coming out, 
4.1 Types of Decisions

41

and companies that do not take advantage of them and evolve are going to be left behind.

4.1.5.6 Bandwagon Effect In psychological studies, it has been found that people will often agree to a solution that they know is incorrect simply because others have 
selected it. Project managers need to be conscious about the bandwagon effect and they need to note when it appears to be happening on their team. As a project manager, 
you need to be acutely aware of what is happening during decision-making and whether it’s truly best for the project.

4.1.5.7 The Abilene Paradox There is another, more insidious, form of the bandwagon effect, which is called the ‘Abilene paradox’. In the Abilene paradox, a need to 
conform leads a team towards something that none of them want to do. It is called this due to the ‘bus to Abilene’ example.

In this example, a family is trying to decide what to do on the weekend. The father asks, ‘Do you want to go to Abilene?’ hoping that the mother doesn’t want to. The 
mother, being supportive of the father, agrees quite readily, ‘Yes, let’s go to Abilene!’ Soon after, the daughter and son, too, agree to go to Abilene, wishing to keep 
their parents happy. Once they all get to Abilene, they have a dreadful time, and each of them turns to the other stating, ‘I didn’t even want to go to Abilene! You 
did!’. In truth, none of them did.

This is an even more disastrous form of the band wagon effect—and it occurs due to a complete communication breakdown. One individual will suggest a solution to a problem 
that they themselves don’t desire—and seeking to be a team player, another will double down on the suggestion. At this point, the true bandwagon effect kicks in, 
ultimately leading to a solution that absolutely no one thought was correct.

4.1.5.8 The Survivorship Bias In survivorship bias, it becomes easy to look at successful individuals and successful projects and assume that major characteristics of 
them are what made them successful. In fact, looking at what is successful is not useful unless you’re also looking at failures.

All the best entrepreneurs quit school—so that must mean that quitting school is the most important part of being an entrepreneur. This is an example of the survivorship 
bias. Many entrepreneurs made it big by taking a leap and investing everything they had into a start-up, but that doesn’t mean that many people didn’t do the exact same 
thing and fail. Without the survivorship bias, it may not be ‘quitting and making a start-up’ that is the commonality; it may be ‘luck’ or even ‘having liquid funds’.

By comparing your successful projects to your failures, you get a better idea of what was truly different between them. This allows you to pare down to the most 
successful strategies, rather than simply assuming that your successful projects 42

4

Making Decisions

Fig. 4.2

Inquiry-advocacy matrix. Adapted from Gomez (2018)

did everything correct from the outset. There is often substantially more to learn from failed projects and failed organizations than there is to learn from successful 
ones, as success can simply occur due to the stars aligning and due to nothing particularly going wrong.

4.1.6 Communicating Decisions

One of the effective means of communicating is using the advocacy-inquiry matrix tool. The fundamental difference between the approach of advocacy and the inquiry stance 
of communicating is that the inquiry mode focuses on curiosity, open-mindedness, and willingness to listen. Contrastingly advocacy depends on conﬁdence, assertion, and a 
predecided position. Figure 4.2 shows advocacyinquiry matrix, which will help you to determine right communication style, to communicate the decision.

As a project manager, you should make a conscious effort to select appropriate communication style, to communicate the decision to the project team. It is important to 
move out of your comfort zone and work with your non-preferred choice of communication style.

4.2 Summary

In this chapter, we focused on understanding decision-making in a project environment. Based on the Cyneﬁx framework, we classiﬁed decisions into four overarching types 
based on context: simple, complicated, complex, and chaotic. Decisions can also be classiﬁed based on information, judgment, and the degree References

43

of participation. Different decision-making styles were discussed primarily based on ambiguity and people focus, and four styles of group decision-making based on the 
Vroom-Yetton leadership model. Since decision makers in the project environment may also suffer certain biases due to human limitations, we also appraised the reader with 
eight common biases that can befall. The art of communicating the decision is equally important as the taking decision so the chapter concluded by providing appropriate 
styles of communicating decisions aided by the advocacy-inquiry matrix.

References

Boyes, A. (2013, January 9). The self-serving bias—Deﬁnition, research, and antidotes. Psychology Today.

Brousseau, K., Driver, M., Hourihan, G., & Larsson, R. (2006). The seasoned executive’s decision-

making style. Harvard Business Review, 110–121.

Gomez, S. (2018) The inquiry-advocacy matrix: The secret to more effective communication at

work. https://business.adobe.com/blog/basics/inquiry-advocacy-matrix Kirytopoulos, K., Voulgaridou, D., & Voulgaridou, V. (2010). Too many cooks spoil the broth,

or maybe not? Paper presented at PMI® Global Congress 2010—EMEA, Milan, Italy. Project

Management Institute, Newtown Square, PA.

Rangnekar, S. (1996). In the world of corporate managers. Vikas Publishers.

Rowe, A. J., & Mason, R. O. (1987). Managing with style: A guide to understand, assessing, and

improving decision making. Jossey-Bass Publisher.

Snowden, D. J., & Boone, M. E. (2007). A leader’s framework for decision making. Harvard

Business Review.

Vroom, V., & Yetton, P. (1973). Leadership and decision-making. University of Pittsburgh Press.

https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt6wrc8r Part II Managing Teams Understanding Teams

Learning Objectives After reviewing the chapter, you will:

• Understand the difference between teams and groups

• Make distinction among different types of teams

• Deﬁne functions of teams in organizations.

Uma’s First Experience as a Team Lead…


