22

3

Emotional Intelligence

It’s business—Leave Your Emotions at the Door.

You might have heard this statement during a heated conversation! For a long time, any discussion on emotions was considered pollyannish and un-business. However, 
scientiﬁc evidence in the late 1980s led to the discovery of ‘Emotional Brain’. Daniel Goleman’s work suggests that emotions are intelligent and are irreplaceable 
resources. Emotional intelligence can yield twice the business performance than purely cognitive intelligence (Mount et al., 2006). In a study examining qualities of star 
project performers of the Bell Labs, it was found that ability to understand their emotions and effectively use emotions of others to build networks to problem solve and 
create (Casper, 2002) was the key differentiators of a star project manager. However, to manage emotions, they have to be understood well.

Every project has its set of complications, uncertainty, nonlinearity, irregularity, and volatility. To be an effective project leader, ability to recognize one’s own and 
others’ emotions and managing them is critical. Understanding and managing emotions of self and others are also important leaders’ because emotions (positive and 
negative) are highly contagious and spread like viruses, process called emotional contagion. These effects become even more powerful in workgroups where there is greater 
work interdependence. Ability of the project manager to manage ones and other emotions is identiﬁed as one of the key ingredients and a central factor in how successful 
leaders manage on a day-to-day basis (Jordon & Lindebaum, 2015).

There are various theorists who have developed models of emotional intelligence with most similarities and few variations. For the purposes of this chapter, we chose one 
of the most established models by Daniel Goleman. According to Goleman, emotional intelligence (EQ) is broken up into four domains:

I. Self-awareness

II. Self-management

III. Social awareness

IV. Relationship Management.

The following paragraphs brieﬂy provide some background on each domain in the quadrant.

3.1 Self-awareness

The capacity and the skill to recognize and interpret one’s emotions, called emotional literacy, enhance self-awareness. Emotional literacy involves the ability to 
monitor, understand, and regulate one’s emotions and behaviours in response to social environments and situations (Snyder, 1974) (also called self-monitoring behaviour). 
It is also about being aware of the impact of one’s behaviour on others and the ability to modify one’s conduct keeping the context in mind.

To understand one’s emotions, it is important to be aware that these are two kinds of emotions that are experienced at different stages: Primary and secondary. 3.1 
Self-awareness

23

Primary emotions, such as fear, sadness, surprise, and happiness, are felt ﬁrst. They are ‘fast-acting’ and occur in close proximity to the event. Secondary emotions, on 
the other hand, are feelings that are experienced after primary emotions are experienced. These emotions don’t pass easily and hold back for longer time, high stickiness. 
They can be problematic also because they can ‘take over’ from primary emotions, effectively blocking them. For example, when there is a change in project delivery, the 
team’s ﬁrst response is likely to be anxiety, that is followed closely by another secondary emotion—irritation, anger, or frustration. However, secondary emotions can be 
managed by being aware of the primary emotions.

However, one can manage unproductive primary emotions from becoming secondary emotions by labelling them. First by labelling them . The ancient wisdom says ‘Putting our 
feelings into words helps us heal better. If a friend is sad and we can get them to talk about it, that probably will make them feel better’. The labelling technique 
rests on accepting the emotion that one is feeling at any given point and giving it a label. Numerous other studies show that when using words to describe our emotions 
dampens the deeper negative emotions. In a research study carried out in 2005 by Matthew Lieberman on thirty participants, each participant was shown a picture of happy, 
angry and scared looking faces. They were asked to do two activities. Under the ﬁrst activity, the participants had to search and match a picture they were holding with 
another picture having the same expression. The other activity involved them searching for a word that aptly described the emotion expressed by the face. In the MRI 
scans, it was found that when the participants used words to describe the emotion they were seeing, their PFC got activated and very little activity occurred in amygdala 
(part of limbic system). 1 Thus, by attributing a label to emotions, we are essentially bridging the gap between thought and feeling, which, to a large extent is what 
emotional intelligence is all about. However, sometimes, we may not have right word to describe the emotion! The Feelings Wheel, created by Dr. Gloria Willcox, is a good 
indicator and puts words to emotions and care for our mental health.2 

The next time you’re feeling a difﬁcult emotion: start by expressing and labelling it. For example, you may say ‘I am feeling anxious’ or ‘My state of mind reﬂects a 
confusion’ Give a label: Give an intensity score: You can also deﬁne the intensity using some scale. For example, say ‘I am feeling anxious, and my anxiety level is 8 on 
a scale of 10’.

1

2

https://newsroom.ucla.edu/releases/Putting-Feelings-Into-Words-Produces-8047. https://blog.calm.com/blog/the-feelings-wheel. 24

3

Emotional Intelligence

3.2 Self-management

Victor Frankel in the famous boos, Man’s Search was meaning said, ‘The one thing you can’t take away from me is the way I choose to respond to what you do to me. The last 
of one’s freedoms is to choose one’s attitude in any given circumstance’.

Have you ever overreacted in a situation or lost control of your emotions and did something or said something in the heat of the moment that you later regretted? The 
sudden response is called ‘amygdala hijack’, and it refers to spontaneous intense reactions to a given situation. 3 In other words, it is when someone ‘loses it’ or 
seriously overreacts to something or someone.

The explanation of the amygdala hijack is the brain structure. Human brain has two parts. First, the prefrontal Cortex which operates slowly and is logical and precise. 
The second is the limbic system that is dominated by emotion and impulse and works fast. The amygdala, placed in the limbic region, is designed to respond swiftly to a 
threat. If coordinated well, both parts of the brain can yield very effective results. Usually in six seconds, data travels from a rational to the limbic brain.

However, during evolutionary development that is ﬁve hundred million years ago, the brain stem assumed responsibility for basic survival and thus often had limbic 
reactions. It is estimated that the neocortex, seat of reason developed over two hundred million years ago. It facilitated the ability to make sense of one’s immediate 
surroundings and respond. However, like in stone age, even today, when faced with a threatening situation, the stimuli bypass the neocortex (overlooking reason) going 
directly to the limbic system, resulting in instant reaction and later rationalization.

Managing one’s emotions is about regulating one’s emotions and avoiding the amygdala hijack. Project leaders face immense uncertainty and ambiguity. Thus, a project 
managers ability to recognize and regulate one’s response and respond to it is considered a strength.

Emotional regulation can be done in two ways.

Step 1: Recognizing emotional triggers

By understanding what triggers your positive and negative emotions, you can control situations and avoid an amygdala hijack. For example, by understanding how every time 
you arrive late, you get angry for missing timelines. It results in irritable behaviour and snappy conversations triggering unproductive time and loss of energy. Another 
example could you realizing that waking up early and spending 20 min in yoga, uplifts your mood and helps you to accomplish critical tasks.

3

https://oxford.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.1093/oso/9780197512654.001.0001/oso9780197512654-chapter-3. 3.2 Self-management

25

Understanding and managing your positive and negative triggers can result in better results.

How do we do that?

Step 2: Controlling emotional triggers

What do you do after realizing your positive and negative triggers? Have you heard about the six seconds test 4 (and pause) and then apply consequential thinking by 
evaluating the costs and beneﬁts of your choices.

What would happen if I lost control over myself? How would happen if I lost this relationship?

It is basically suspending actions when facing a particularly stressful situation. The SOBER technique helps manage panic attacks and reduce anxiety.

• STOP—Whatever you are doing, just stop.

• OBSERVE—Simply observe the emotions inside you in an objective way, without judging.

• BREATHE—Take some deep, calming breaths through your nose. Hold your breath for 3–5 s before releasing it through your mouth.

• EVALUATE—Notice how you feel now and if your perspective, thoughts and feelings have changed.

• RESPOND—Choose the most appropriate response to the situation, from a place of respect and kindness for yourself and others.

When we’re faced with a challenge, our view suddenly narrows and we tend to lose perspective, resulting in losing sight of the bigger picture. So, the key to reversing 
this is to practice self-distancing techniques which enable us to make better decisions and assess challenges with more objectivity. An interesting approach to managing 
time between and stimulus and response is to apply Solomon’s Paradox. It is deﬁned as human ability to reason more sensibly about someone else’s problems than one’s own.

Practising self-distancing over time increases our emotional intelligence and our ability to approach situations wisely and with empathy. There are two ways to practice 
self-distancing when faced with a challenge, both which require reframing a situation:

• What suggestions would you give to a friend who is experiencing same problem?

4

https://hbr.org/2015/12/just-6-seconds-of-mindfulness-can-make-you-more-effective. 26

3

Emotional Intelligence

• Talking in third person to yourself can also help. to yourself in the third person. Instead of asking, ‘Why am I doing this?’ or ‘What can I do?’, rather ask yourself, 
‘Why is she doing that?’ or ‘What can she do?’

Step 3: Reframing

The meaning of an event depends on the frame that you put it in. When you change the frame, the meaning changes which in turn leads to change in your behaviour. Positive 
framing isn’t about avoiding a situation. Reframing is a technique that advocates looking at a situation differently in a different and more positive light. Positive 
framing helps in changing outlook. Problems only get worse with a negative attitude.

For instance, instead of saying ‘It’s going to take such a long time for my broken ribs to heal, and the car will never be the same’, can be framed differently. ‘It’s 
going to take months for my broken ribs to heal, it’s a long time, but it’s not forever’.

Positive frame helps in good feel factor and reenergizes one. Once the energy starts to change, good things can begin to happen. Optimism helps in seeing opportunities. 
This also helps in stopping negative primary emotions become secondary emotions.

3.3 Understanding Others

Recall the leaders you have worked with who invoked very strong commitment and loyalty from you. List the reasons that motivated you to work for them? What were the 
reasons to follow and support those leaders?

(a) Were they willing to look at the problem from your point of view?

(b) Were they good listeners?

(c) Were they approachable?

Managing others begins with emotional awareness and ability to recognize and understand what other people are experiencing. Recognizing and appropriately responding to 
others’ emotions are the key requirements of a leader with high emotional intelligence.

Leaders with high EI provide emotional and instrumental support to their subordinates. They are empathetic, listening, responsive to needs of others, provide positive 
feedback and support when needed.

How does one focus on the feelings of others? This can happen by being other centred. The key skills to understanding and managing others emotions is empathy and 
listening. 3.3 Understanding Others

27

1. Empathy

Work context, where tasks are interdependent and has time and cost constraints, stretch of emotions in natural. An emotionally intelligent project leader, instead of 
making assumptions about why the other person act in the way they do, tries to explore the underlying emotional drivers of that person’s actions.

Empathy is the ability to examine what it would be like to experience emotions that others are going through.

An interesting framework to understand the emotions of others is the iceberg model. Human behaviour can be understood using the metaphor of the iceberg. Just as in the 
iceberg, where only one-tenth of iceberg is visible above the water, in human behaviour, what we see ‘above the waterline’ is only one-tenth, the factors shaping these 
attitudes and behaviours lie ‘below the waterline’.

Good leaders manage the emotions of team members, understanding that part of human emotions that lies below the water is important.

Self-assessment: What is your empathy quotient? 5

2. Active Listening

The process to increase empathy is active listening.

Listening is an active process in which a mindful decision is made to listen to others and understand the messages of the speaker. It is a skill we need to inculcate 
through practice. This is because humans are not born as good listeners. Human brain works four times the speed that someone can speak. We listen at 125–250 wpm, think at 
1000–3000 wpm. 75% of the time we are distracted, preoccupied or forgetful. 20% of the time, we remember what we hear. Thus, we make up our mind based on our assumptions 
even before we listen to others perceptive.

Listening helps to learn about the challenges that people are facing and results in the formation of an emotional connection with that person. On listening we realize 
that others may also be dealing with a complex emotion that goes beyond what we see on the surface. It is believed that most people do not listen with the intent to 
understand; they listen with the intent to reply.

Good project managers are active listeners who speak 30% of the time and listen 70% of the time. Some of the key aspects of listening constitutes a key skill to 
understanding emotions of others.

Some of the principles of active listening are:

1. Don’t interrupt

2. Paraphrase: summarize and repeat back what you have heard

3. Clarify: If you are unsure how others are feeling, request for a clariﬁcation

4. Validate the other person’s perspective by making verbal afﬁrmations like ‘I see’, ‘I know’, ‘Sure’, ‘Thank you’, or ‘I understand’

5

https://psychology-tools.com/test/empathy-quotient. 28

3

Emotional Intelligence

5. Using nonverbal cues which show understanding such as nodding, eye contact, and leaning forward shows interest.

Are you a good listener? Check out.6 

3.4 Managing Others

The characteristics of an emotionally intelligent leader are to have the ability to relate to and respond to individuals skilfully resolving conﬂict and executing tasks. 
After recognizing others’ emotions, the next task for a project manager is to manage others. Effectively, developing additional social/emotional skills makes 
relationships more effective, fruitful, and fulﬁlling.

Some of the steps for managing with emotional intelligence are:

a. Anticipating Other’s Needs: There are different motivators (things that move us) or drivers for us: Intrinsic or extrinsic. Examples of extrinsic motivators are 
bonuses, recognition, promotions bonuses, among others. Examples of intrinsic motivators are passion, alignment with values, and sense of belonging or purpose. They are 
intangible, abstract, and self-perpetuating. Being aware and understanding the needs, desires, and skills of employees will help in building a strong, cohesive team that 
successfully accomplishes goals. Successful leaders can anticipate and recognize other’s needs, as well as assist them in getting those needs met.

b. Providing Psychological Safety: Humans are wired to connect, and one of the most fundamental intrinsic motivators is belonging. Good project leaders try to understand 
the ambitions of their subordinates and help them achieve their biggest goals. A study on team performance at Google, 7 called project Aristotle, revealed that the 
highest-performing teams have one thing in common: psychological safety. It is one’s belief that one will not be penalized for mistakes and errors made. This belief 
allows encourages creativity and risk taking. Talking about themselves, their failures makes subordinates experience psychological safety and bolster trust. In such 
environment, teams become more open-minded, resilient, motivated, and persistent. Effective project leaders also mindfully build a rapport and try to understand a bit 
about what’s going on in their team members personal life and maintain a relationship that is beyond transactional building strong rapport that almost always leads to 
higher productivity and better retention.

6

https://www.thoughtco.com/listening-test-are-you-A-good-listener-31656. https://www.trainingcoursematerial.com/free-assessment-tools/how-good-a-listener-are-you-quiz. 7 
https://hbr.org/2017/08/high-performing-teams-need-psychological-safety-heres-how-to-cre ate-it. 3.4 Managing Others

29

c. Engaging in Crucial Difﬁcult Conversations: While on one hand good leaders open up with their team and are vulnerable, on the other hand they can have difﬁcult but 
crucial conversation with their teams. They are able to identify the formation of conﬂict and take proactive steps to move others to a more positive interaction. They 
restrict to facts instead of assumptions and are also careful about their body language and words. It is well researched that 10% of conﬂict is due to the difference in 
opinion and 90% is due to the delivery and tone of voice. Managers are careful about sending nonverbal messages to others about what they think and feel. Turning to 
sarcasm, humour, or negative body language instead of engaging in dialogue is not productive. Besides, they do not blame or criticize but demonstrate a curious approach 
and demonstrate a learning mindset. John Gottman’s research 8 shows that blame and criticism escalate conﬂict, leading to defensiveness and—eventually—to disengagement. 
When others get furious, get curious. Effective leaders use neutral language, engage in exploration, and ask for solutions.

d. Perspective Taking: This approach helps team members to look at the situation from the lens of the other person. It reframe a negative experience and to improve future 
events or circumstances without blaming.

One of the ways to do so is if one of your team members is not making enough contributions in the meeting, instead of getting angry, a dialogue like this could be:

In the past two weeks there’s been a noticeable drop in your participation during meetings and progress appears to be slowing on your project. I imagine there must be 
some reasons. Can we discuss these? How do you suggest we can address these? How could I support you?

e. Humour: Humour increases, as does solution-ﬁnding and divergent thinkingthe cognitive process underlying creativity. It increases feel-good hormones dopamine, 
oxytocin and endorphin. Leaders with high EI have the ability to defuse stress and exhibit a positive mood, then team collaboration, creativity, and performance goes up. 
According to research, leaders with humour quotient are seen as 27% more motivating and admired, and their teams are 15% more engaged and twice as likely to solve a 
creativity challenge. 9 The opposite is also true, if the leader radiates negativity those metrics plummet,

8

Transforming Criticism into Wishes: A Recipe for Successful Conﬂict (gottman.com). 
https://neuroleadership.com/your-brain-at-work/neuroscience-laughter-at-work/#:~:text=Lau ghing%20swaps%20the%20cortisol%20in,%3A%20dopamine%2C%20oxytocin%20and%20e 
ndorphins.&text=Oxytocin%20is%20considered%20the%20%E2%80%9Cempathy,it%20crea tes%20feelings%20of%20relatedness.

9 30

3

Emotional Intelligence

3.5 Summary

The chapter introduces the concept of emotional intelligence and its relevance in the project environment using the popular EQ framework. The chapter elaborated on 
various dimensions of understanding and managing self and others. Various interventions that can be undertaken to understand and manage others were discussed.

References

Casper, C. M. (2002). Using emotional intelligence to improve project performance. In Project Management Institute Annual Seminars & Symposium, San Antonio, TX. Newtown 
Square, PA: Project Management Institute.

Jordan, P. J., & Lindebaum, D. (2015). A model of within person variation in leadership: Emotion regulation and scripts as predictors of situationally appropriate 
leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 26(4), 594–605.

Mount, M., Ilies, R., & Johnson, E. (2006). Relationship of personality traits and counterproductive work behaviors: The mediating effects of job satisfaction. Personnel 
psychology, 59(3), 591622.

Snyder, M. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30(4), 526. Making Decisions

Learning Objectives After reviewing the chapter, you will:

• Understand decision-making and its importance

• Understand different types of decisions

• Make distinction among different types of decision styles

• Understand cognitive biases.

Story Uma was assigned one of the challenging projects that were not getting ﬁre regulatory clearance for the use of the facilities created. Uma is known to be a very 
effective project manager specially handling difﬁcult situations and making decisions in such situations. To get technical details and understand the possibilities of 
addressing the ﬁre regulatory requirement she consulted technical consultants, the contractors. She got very different options from each one of them.

She is looking at each of these options and wondering what decision she should take?

4

4.1 Types of Decisions

Have you observed your project manager keenly and your project team members during decision-making process?

Each project manager approach decision-making in many different ways. Decisionmaking is the selection of a procedure to weigh alternatives and ﬁnd a solution to a 
problem. In addition, certain situations will require different approaches of decision-making in order to be effective. Snowden and Boone (2007) have formed

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023 U. A. Agarwal et al., Managing People in Projects for High Performance, Management for 
Professionals, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-8206-4_4

31 32

4

Making Decisions

Table 4.1

Context

Types of decision based on contexts

Cause–effect relations
