Preface
=======

The rapid growth of technology and new smart, sustainable development
initiatives has made the Internet of Things (IoT) and edge analytics an
inevitable platform for all engineering domains. The need for a sophisticated
and ambient environment has resulted in an exponential growth in
automation and artificial intelligence. The right sensor or actuator, a specific
processor, and the correct transmission unit can offer the best solution to
any IoT problem. Lightweight machine learning or mathematical logic can
bring a good solution to existing smart-city problems.
This book provides detailed information on sensors, their interfacing
connections, programming with single-board computers, and creating
integrated projects with a combination of sensors, processors, and actuators.
A detailed introduction to Python and Arduino-based programming is also
discussed to kindle interest in IoT programming. IoT products’ wired and
wireless connections are discussed, and programming examples are provided.
This is a completely new textbook that reflects recent developments

while providing a comprehensive introduction to the fields of IoT, single-
board computers, and Python programming. It is aimed at advanced

undergraduates as well as researchers and practitioners. This book deals more

with electronics and programming than simple text. It best suits outcome-
based education systems and can aid industry-ready IoT engineers.

Funding Information
The part of this book is supported by the Department of Biotechnology
funding information (BT/PR38273/AAQ/3/980/2020).
The original version of this book was revised. A correction to this book is available
at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8108-6_11

1

CHAPTER 1

An Overview of the
Internet of Things
(IoT) and Sensors

Recent advancements in single-board computers (SBCs) [16] and boards
have made the Internet of Things (IoT) more accessible and easier to use.
The complete automation, information analysis from sensor data, and
integration of individual components with IoT systems helps to build new
Smart environment solutions. The scope of the areas is broadened with
IoT components and sensors.
IoT uses existing and emerging technology for event detection and
automation. IoT has the advantages of recent software advancements,
reducing hardware prices and available technology options. It created a
great change in product delivery and services and a major revolution in
Industry 4.0. Figure 1-1 illustrates the key features of IoT.

© G. R. Kanagachidambaresan 2022
G. R. Kanagachidambaresan, Internet of Things Using Single Board Computers,
Maker Innovations Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8108-6_1

2
Figure 1-1. IoT feature and data flow

Sensors
Sensors are the main data acquisition and detection system, which
converts any physical quantity (i.e., event) into a signal. In some sensors,
direct conversion takes place; in others, multiple conversions take place
to attain accuracy and quantification. Some of the sensors used in IoT and
prototyping are shown in Figure 1-2. Sensors are collectively connected
with an A/D converter to convert their signals to digital forms so that a
processor understands and can program effectively. Figure 1-2 illustrates
sensor classification (mode of operation, signal output, and energy-based).
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

3

Figure 1-2. Sensor type classification
Next, let’s further discuss sensor type classification.
Energy-based
Generator
Energy generation–based sensors provides conversion energy conversion,
like voltage and current, on any physical event. For example, a
piezoelectric sensor converts vibration energy to a proportional voltage.
The seebeck metal junction converts the change in temperature to
proportional energy conversion.

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

4
Conversion
Sensors convert one mode of physical quantity to another; for example,
an anemometer converts air velocity to rotational motion, which is further
converted to electrical voltage for measurement. These sensors are
operated in a proportional zone for calibration and stable operation. Most
sensors provide linear data conversion.
Signal Output
Analog
Sensors such as anemometers provide analog conversion of data. Analog
signal from annemometer is converted to digital data with the help of an
analog-to-digital converter. The sensor’s frequency of operation should
be far greater than the frequency of the physical quantity to get clear
information after digital conversion.
Discrete
Cameras and tile-based sensors provide discrete and digital information
directly to the processor. This makes the sensor easy to integrate with any
digital processor.
Mode of Operation
Sensors are deflection- or comparison-based. Deflection happens when
sensing a physical event. This is normally an angular-based movement
between two points. Comparison-based meters normally work with
standard available data. GPS sensors provide comparison-based sensing.
• Deflection (e.g., voltage meters and current meters)
• Comparison (e.g., GPS sensors)
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

5

Electronic Sensors
Figure 1-3 illustrates sensor classification based on the field of operation,
such as mechanical, optical, electrical, acoustic, thermal, chemical,
radiation, biological, and magnetic.

Mechanical
• Linear and angular position
• Velocity of the subject
• Acceleration
Figure 1-3. Sensor classification based on measurand

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

6
• Force
• Viscosity, rigidness, and roughness
• Pressure and stress
• Strain
• Mass and density measurement
Optical
• Wave velocity
• Polarization and spectrum
• Wave amplitude
Electrical
• Conductivity
• Potential difference
• Charge and current density
• Field
Thermal
• Heat flux
• Thermal conductivity
Chemical
• States and identifies
• Color change
• Change in voltage
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

7

Radiation
• Energy
• Intensity
Biological
• Mass
• Concentration
• States
• Magnetic
• Magnetic field
• Magnetic flux
• Permeability

Connectivity
Figure 1-4 illustrates the connectivity features of IoT communication.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

8
Figure 1-4. IoT connectivity features
Bluetooth Low Energy, Zigbee, LoRa, and Wi-Fi are the most common
types of connectivity in an IoT environment. I2C, SPI, and Rx-Tx serial
communication protocols are examples of wired connectivity.
Bluetooth
Bluetooth network technology creates a personal area network (PAN) by
wirelessly connecting mobile devices over a short distance. The Bluetooth
architecture has its own independent model with a stack of protocols; it
does not follow the standard OSI or TCP/IP models.
Zigbee
The Zigbee 3.0 protocol [1] is an IEEE 802.15.4 specification that supports
a 2.4 GHz frequency band. The following are some of the features of
Zigbee 3.0.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

9

• Low power: Devices that comply with Zigbee 3.0
consume less power and transmit data at a slower rate.
For IoT devices, long-lasting batteries are required. As a
result, the Internet of Things (IoT) network extensively
uses this standard.
• Reliable and robust: The mesh topology of the Zigbee
3.0 network eliminates single points of failure and
ensures packet delivery reliability.
• Scalable: Devices can be added to a Zigbee 3.0 network
anytime.
• It is a secure network because it employs AES-128
encryption.
• Global standard: Zigbee 3.0 devices use the 2.4 GHz
frequency band, which is widely used worldwide. As
a result, it has become the industry standard around
the world.
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi [2] is a technology that transfers data through radio waves that can
make small gadgets exchange data connected within a small router. Wi-Fi
uses the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers’ (IEEE) 802.11
standards for effective data transmission.
IEEE 802.11 devices have the primary benefit of making it easier to
deploy local area networks (LANs) at a lower cost. They can host wireless
LANs in outdoor areas and airports, where running cables to every device
isn’t practical.

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

10
LoRa
LoRa [3] is a long-range wireless communication technology derived from
the CSS chirp-based spread spectrum. The chirp pulses communicate
information, similar to BATS communication.
Wired Communication
I
2
C
I
2
C (Inter-Integrated Circuit) [4] is a two-wired communication protocol
(see Figure 1-5). It is a bus interface, serial communication protocol built
into devices. It has recently become a popular protocol for short-distance
communication.
Only two bidirectional open-drain lines—SDA (Serial Data) and SCL
(Serial Clock)—are used for data communication. Both lines are cranked
up. The SDA pin sends and receives data. SCL carries the clock signal.
I2C has two modes of operation: master and slave. Master mode is the
most advanced mode.
Slave mode obeys the command from the master and transmits or
receives data accordingly.
Each clock’s high to low pulse on the SCL line synchronizes each data
bit transferred on the SDA line. Figure 1-5 shows I2

C communication

protocols.

Figure 1-5. I2

C communication protocols

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

11

SPI
The data communication module uses SDA and SCL dual connection
lines. SDA receives and transmits data. Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI)
communication is mainly used by components such as RTC, A-to-D
converters, and other computer peripherals. SPI [5] communication uses
a full duplex synchronous communication protocol that works in serial
mode between the master and slave devices. Figure 1-6 illustrates SPI
communication protocols.

Serial Communication
Serial communication is a straightforward and dependable way to send
data over long distances. RS-232 is a widely used serial communication
protocol. The data in this standard is sent in serial format at a preset
speed (called a baud rate/number) of bits communicated between
the sender and receiver. Common baud rates are 4800, 9600, 19200,
and 38400. Figure 1-7 shows the connection diagram for the UART
communication scheme.
Figure 1-6. SPI communication protocols

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

12
Figure 1-7. UART data communication
Machine Intelligence
Machine intelligence [14] attempts to program a computer to perform
previously human-only tasks. In general, the learning process in intelligent
machines entails gathering information about their environment,
deploying that information to build knowledge about it, and then
generalizing that knowledge base to deal with environmental uncertainty.
Two machine intelligence techniques—imitation learning and
reinforcement learning—have been developed to help machines learn.
The learning algorithms are opted based on consideration of tasks and
their characteristics. Intelligent systems are an option to collect data
from the agents and acquire knowledge about its surrounding, and the
computation is adapted for the environment. To maintain control over
a society of autonomous agents, the agents’ learning process requires a
self-organizing mechanism. It should be noted that imbuing intelligent
machines with the capacity to learn is a difficult task; however, the capacity
to learn is what defines a machine as intelligent. Figure 1-8 illustrates
machine learning classification based on input data.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

13

Figure 1-8. Classical machine learning domains
The supervised learning module predicts category (classification
module) and number (regression module). Unsupervised learning
provides clustering, dimension reduction, and association modules.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

14
Active Management
The main components and operation of a closed-loop sensor management
system are depicted in Figure 1-9. The raw sensor data is processed for
information relevant to the sensing objective when the sensor is chosen,
and a measurement is taken. This usually requires the fusion of data from
several sensing modalities (e.g., optical and acoustic) and other properties,
as well as the addition of information from earlier measurements and
possibly other sources. Auxiliary information, such as target tracks or
choices about non-sensor manager-related concerns, may be generated by
the loop’s fusion and signal processing. For sensor management reasons,
they must generate a state of information that allows quantification
of the benefits of each feasible sensor selection in the following time
epoch. Currently, accessible quantification methodologies range from
statistical (e.g., mean risk or knowledge gain) to entirely heuristic. The
sensor management must then optimize which sensor to use for the next
measurement.

Figure 1-9. Data processing in IoT architecture
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

15
The sensor selector provides information from a particular sensor
module. Once data from a particular sensor is received, data fusion is
done through a sensor data fusion algorithm. The signal is processed using
algorithms. The data is corrected through closed-loop control system
algorithms.
Sensor Fusion
Sensor fusion is a technique for reducing the amount of uncertainty in a
robot’s navigation or task performance by combining data from multiple
sensors, as shown in Figure 1-10. Sensor fusion helps the robot create a
more accurate world model, which allows it to navigate and behave better.
There are three main methods for combining sensor data.
• Redundant sensors collect repeated information that is
permanently fit in sources like heaters, gates, and other
locations.
• Complementary sensors collect different information
on events happening inside the monitoring
environment.
• Coordinated sensors are logically operating sensor that
collects information about the environment.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

16
Figure 1-10. Sensor data aggregation and fusion process
To obtain high-quality, relevant measurement data, data fusion
combines several sources of information utilizing mathematical methods
and technical tools. Improved detectability and reliability, expanded range
of spatial-temporal perception, reduced degree of inference ambiguity,
improved detection accuracy, increased dimension of target features,
improved resolution of spatial questions, and enhanced fault-tolerant
fusion are all advantages of data fusion over independent processing of a
single source.

Smart Devices
Human-Computer Interaction
Human-computer interaction (HCI) [6] is a subfield of computer science
that investigates how people (users) interact with computers, as well
as the design, evaluation, and implementation of user interfaces for
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

17
computer systems that are responsive to the user’s needs and habits.
This multidisciplinary field incorporates computer science, behavioral
sciences, and design. One of the primary goals of HCI is to make
computer systems more accessible and useable. A user interface consists
of hardware and software that allows users to modify the system while
allowing the system to communicate with the user. HCI focuses on the
design, implementation, and evaluation of user interfaces. In its broadest
sense, HCI occurs when a human user and a computer system collaborate
to achieve a goal. Usability is the part of human-computer interaction
concerned with making it, among other things, successful, efficient, and
enjoyable for the user. Usability entails usability, productivity, efficiency,
effectiveness, learnability, retention, and user interest.

Context Awareness
Figure 1-11 depicts sensor data context awareness [7]. The sensor data and
context awareness provide better infrastructure and ambiance.

Figure 1-11. Data awareness schemes in IoT

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

18
Actuators
The applications in a smart city [10]—such as health care, smart
agriculture, and other industrial applications—use actuators [8], such
as drives, motors, and other physical signal converters. A wireless sensor
and actuator network (WSAN) [9] comprises automated actuators.

Microcomputers normally link directly to tiny actuators; however, heavy-
load actuators are coupled via driver circuits. Linear and rotational moving

actuators are the two types of actuators that move. A huge number of our
daily demands, such as fans and escalators, are met by these actuators.
Electric, pneumatic, and hydraulic power sources are also used to
classify them. Electric actuators are the most frequent, and PWM signals
are generated by the system control actuators like servo and stepper
motors. The significant change in the pulse width, time, and change in
frequency is reflected in the actuator’s velocity, rotational direction, and
amount of torque exerted. Most actuators in the industry are actuated
through PLC boards. This chapter showcases building prototypes with
small servos and steppers, which are often accomplished using SBCs like
Arduino and Raspberry Pi.
Table 1-1 describes the actuator types mentioned in this book,
including micro steppers, SG90, and infrared. To keep things simple,
these actuators are primarily programmed using Arduino and Raspberry
Pi ideas.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

19

Table 1-1. Actuator Types
S.No Actuator type Output Operating
range
Power
required
Number
of wire
connection
External
battery source
required
Connectivity type
Analog/i2c/spi, digital/
driver requirement

1 Servo motor
Angular
motion
0-5 v Less than
1W
3 Not necessary
for low power
PW
M

2 Stepper motor
Angular
position
2.55 v-2.8 v 1.68
Amps
4 Yes
Drivers or DPDT relay

3 Oled display
Digital
display
3.3
V-5
V
20m
A max
3.3v 12C pins yes IIC & SPI

(continued)
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

20Table 1-1. (continued)

4 Relay Mechanical
contacts and
solid state
5ms-20ms 5V 3 No
(unless it’s12
V

relay)
Both digital and analog

5 Solenoid Mechanical
energy
angular
motion
5-10ms
15-150ms
9-65
W 2 terminals
each
External
regulator or
separate power
supply
Both digital and analog

6 IR led Light 760-1nm
Max = 780-
50nm
1.2-3.4
V 2 pins for
each
no Both digital and analog

S.No Actuator type Output Operating
range
Power
required
Number
of wire
connection
External
battery source
required
Connectivity type
Analog/i2c/spi, digital/
driver requirement

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

21

7 Heat
exchanger
Thermal 1000°C and
1000 bars
Not
needed
Wires not
needed
Acid batteries
Tube box

8 Speaker
Sound
pressure
level (SPL)
in dB
60
Hz –
18 k
Hz
100 –
1000 watts
2 or more
No Digital

9 Linear
actuator
Straight
line motion/
mechanical
energy
5 lb – 10000
lb force
15 – 2000
pounds
4 pins
DC Battery
Digital

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

22
IoT and Smart City Applications
Automobile Sensors
Currently, modern automotive design can be accomplished using a variety
of sensors [12]. These are integrated into the vehicle’s engine to detect and
resolve issues such as repairs and service. Sensors in automobiles keep
an eye on the vehicle’s operation. The owner of a car has no idea how
many sensors their vehicle contains. Automobile sensors are sophisticated
sensors that can monitor and control various parameters, including oil
pressure, temperature, emission level, and coolant level. Numerous types
of sensors are used in automobiles, but it is critical to understand how they
work. To demonstrate the purpose of these sensors, the following is a list of
the most frequently found sensors in automobiles. The sensor depicted in
Figure 1-12 is used in automobile systems.
• Speed sensor for the engine
• Oxygen sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Mass airflow sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Fuel temperature sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Camshaft position sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Throttle position sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Vehicle speed sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Spark knock sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Coolant sensor for the exhaust manifold
• Voltage sensor for the exhaust manifold
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

23

Figure 1-12. Some important automobile sensors
Smart Home Sensors
Smarter homes are established with IoT, cloud tech, and logical event
processing. IoT allows mobile applications [11] with various sensors to be
managed and communicated remotely. Sensors can monitor and regulate
a variety of household appliances, such as air conditioning, lighting,
and other environmental controls. As a result, it integrates computer
intelligence with household equipment, allowing for temperature
monitoring indoors and outdoors and appliance operation.
Cloud technology enables expandable processing energy, memory
availability, apps for designing, administering, and operating home
services, and remote control of home equipment. A rule-based event
processing system manages an advanced smart home’s overall control
and orchestration. The term smart home refers to a domestic application
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

24
of building automation that encompasses all embedded technology and
its control and automation. It encompasses home appliances like air
conditioning/heating systems, smart TVs, large appliances, and IP security
cameras that can talk with their owner on a time and event basis through
mobile phones and the Internet. The home electrical system is made of
switches and sensors connected to a centralized IoT system operated
by the homeowners and controlled via the cloud, GSM, and WLAN
connectivity.
The main advantages include energy efficiency, security, reduced
operating costs, and user sophistication. The convenience, cost, and
reduced operating time provide plenty of energy savings to the users.
These techs are more adaptable to changes in the needs of outpatients,
such as post-surgical people recovering in their homes. Its architecture is
frequently adaptable enough to integrate various devices from multiple
manufacturers and standards. Figure 1-13 depicts the sensors used in a
smart home system.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

25

Figure 1-13. Smart home sensors
Smart Transportation Sensors
Improvements in ICT (Information and Communication Technology)
devices have enabled opportunities for intelligent and sustainable
transportation systems [13]. ICT in transportation helps sustainability,
safety integration, and high-speed, accurate responses. The primary
expectation of people using intelligent transportation like fast mobility,
environmental sustainability, and economic development through goods
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

26
and service transportation can be done through ICT tools. The platform
used by intelligent transport systems (ITS) to access, gather and assess
precise environmental data is crucial to its operation.

There are typically two types of sensor platforms. The first is an intra-
vehicle sensing platform that collects data about a vehicle’s condition.

The two approaches of sensing are used in ITS. An intra-vehicle sensing
platform collects data about a vehicle’s working conditions. An urban
sensing platform gathers information about traffic conditions. Sensing
technology has become essential for vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) [15] and
vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication. The data is further
communicated to a transportation management system (TMS) for further
data analysis and prognostics. The data can offer prognostics that can be
used for decision-making, reducing pollution, emission traffic congestion,
and road reconstruction.
Non-intrusive sensors offer information like the location of the signal
acquired through GPS devices, traffic queue density through LIDAR and
traffic conditions through combined GPS information, and road and
weather conditions. Sensors, such as high traffic lights, are typically placed
in higher positions to monitor the region of interest. These sensors are also
mounted under bridges and directly beneath a surveillance zone. Some
sensors are positioned at the ground level to detect pedestrians. These
are mostly used for single lanes and unidirectional traffic due to their
vulnerability to interference from neighboring objects. Figure 1-14 shows
sensors utilized in intelligent transportation.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

27

Figure 1-14. List of sensors in transportation
Non-invasive sensors can more effectively perform many intrusive
sensor duties. Weather conditions, like rain, fog, snow, and dust pollution,
significantly impact them. To make educated decisions about traffic
improvement projects, precise traffic statistics are required. Drivers are
more likely to detect non-intrusive sensors, leading to varied and faster
responses, such as slowing down and driving in the proper lane. It is
critical not only to install these sensors but also to reduce driver reaction
times based on the collected data and provide a more realistic depiction of
the context and reality of the road or avenue.

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

28
Summary
This chapter overviewed sensors, actuators, and other communication
protocols. Various sensor usage with different applications was also
addressed in this chapter. Sensor classification and interfacing with boards
are discussed in the next chapter.

References
[1] S. Long and F. Miao, “Research on Zigbee wireless communication
technology and its application,” 2019 IEEE 4th Advanced Information
Technology, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IAEAC),
pp. 1830–1834. doi: 10.1109/IAEAC47372.2019.8997928.
[2] K. Pahlavan and P. Krishnamurthy, “Evolution and Impact of Wi-Fi
Technology and Applications: A Historical Perspective,” International
Journal of Wireless Information Networks, vol. 28, Nov. 19, 2020, pp. 3–19.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10776-020-00501-8.
[3] U. Noreen, A. Bounceur, and L. Clavier, “A study of LoRa low power
and wide area network technology,” 2017 International Conference on
Advanced Technologies for Signal and Image Processing (ATSIP), pp. 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/ATSIP.2017.8075570.
[4] Dawoud Shenouda Dawoud and Peter Dawoud, “Design of I2C Bus
and Operation,” in Microcontroller and Smart Home Networks, River
Publishers, 2020, pp. 55–112.
[5] Dawoud Shenouda Dawoud, Peter Dawoud, “Serial Peripheral
Interface (SPI),” in Serial Communication Protocols and Standards
RS232/485, UART/USART, SPI, USB, INSTEON, Wi-Fi and WiMAX, River
Publishers, 2020, pp.191–244.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

29
[6] Erin T. Solovey and Felix Putze, Improving HCI with Brain Input:
Review, Trends, and Outlook, Now Publishers, 2021.
[7] P. S. Gandodhar and S. M. Chaware, “Context Aware Computing
Systems: A survey,” 2018 2nd International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in
Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud), 2018, pp. 605–608.
[8] Jeffrey Wishart, Yan Chen, Steven Como, Narayanan Kidambi, Duo
Lu, Yezhou Yang, “Sensor and Actuator Hardware,” in Fundamentals of
Connected and Automated Vehicles, SAE, 2022, pp.70–89.
[9] A. Eraliev and G. Bracco, “Design and Implementation of Zigbee
Based Low-Power Wireless Sensor and Actuator Network (WSAN) for
Automation of Urban Garden Irrigation Systems,” 2021 IEEE International
IOT, Electronics and Mechatronics Conference (IEMTRONICS), 2021,
pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1109/IEMTRONICS52119.2021.9422568.
[10] N. Mishra, P. Singhal, and S. Kundu, “Application of IoT Products in
Smart Cities of India,” 2020 9th International Conference System Modeling
and Advancement in Research Trends (SMART), pp. 155–157. doi: 10.1109/
SMART50582.2020.9337150.
[11] A. Eleyan and J. Fallon, “IoT-based Home Automation Using
Android Application,” 2020 International Symposium on Networks,
Computers and Communications (ISNCC), 2020, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/
ISNCC49221.2020.9297320.
[12] S. Wasnik and R. Venkatesh, “Understanding usage of IoT
Applications and its impact on consumer decision making in Indian
Automobile industry,” 2022 International Conference on Decision Aid
Sciences and Applications (DASA), 2022, pp. 1259–1264. doi: 10.1109/
DASA54658.2022.9765216.

Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

30
[13] Saravjeet Singh and Jaiteg Singh, “Location Driven Edge Assisted
Device and Solutions for Intelligent Transportation,” in Fog, Edge, and
Pervasive Computing in Intelligent IoT Driven Applications, IEEE, 2021,
pp.123–147. doi: 10.1002/9781119670087.ch7.
[14] Shalli Rani, R. Maheswar, G. R. Kanagachidambaresan, Sachin Ahuja,
and Deepali Gupta, Machine Learning Paradigm for Internet of Things
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2022.
[15] S. Kulkarni, A. Darekar, and S. Shirol, “Proposed framework for V2V
communication using Li-Fi technology,” 2017 International Conference on
Circuits, Controls, and Communications (CCUBE), 2017, pp. 187–190. doi:
10.1109/CCUBE.2017.8394163.
[16] G. R. Kanagachidambaresan, Role of Single Board Computers
(SBCs) in rapid IoT Prototyping, Springer, 2021. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-72957-8.
Chapter 1 An Overview of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensors

31

CHAPTER 2

IoT Sensors and Their
Interfacing Protocols
Sensors can detect specific entities or functions by looking for them in
the environment [1]. Electromechanical, optoelectrical, or electronic
equipment can all be used to create these devices. Detectors for physical
presence, such as flame or metal, can be found. Others include sensors
that monitor gas and chemical concentrations and other sorts of sensors.
There are additional varieties that can detect motion or closeness, while
others can monitor physical qualities like temperature, pressure, or
radiation, for example [3].
It depends on the application [2], but electromagnetic fields,
optics, or a mix of these can be used. It is common practice to employ
a variety of sensors, detectors, and transducers in a wide range of
industries to evaluate, monitor, and regulate machines’ processes and
functions. As the Internet of Things (IoT) becomes more widespread,
so does the demand for sensors as the main automation tool [5].
Figure 2-1 showcases different types of sensors.

© G. R. Kanagachidambaresan 2022
G. R. Kanagachidambaresan, Internet of Things Using Single Board Computers,
Maker Innovations Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8108-6_2

32
Figure 2-1. Types of sensors

Figure 2-2. Image sensors
Vision and Imaging Sensors
Figure 2-2 shows an image based display.
